---
title: '"Meritocracies"'
date: 2019-03-27
permalink: /posts/2020/07/merit/
tags:
  - Ethics
---

One of the problems I have with meritocracies is the way that "merit" is synonymous with "awards and accolades" such that people are not likely to take risks on the merit of those who were not previously recognized for their merit.

As a result, those who previously garnered awards find it easy to gain even more awards, leading to a positive feedback loop -- but who takes the risk on the person to give them their first recognition?

All this has led to is a system which lifts up a few standout people, when those of equal (and sometimes greater) potential have difficulty surviving. This is even more problematic given the ways in which many awards are subject to subconscious biases because they are decided upon by people, and therefore perpetuate unintentional harmful power dynamics.

For instance, meritocracies that solely judge quality of work anonymously ignore the fact that those of privilege carry more resources -- often in the form of a network of people who can assist in preparation -- leading to an imbalance among class lines, which, in America, aligns well with racial and religious lines. Two people with identical resumes are never actually identical if their demographics are different, and those differences mean that one of them likely encountered greater obstacles on the way to reaching that level of achievement. I, frankly, always wonder if the one facing greater obstacles would have achieved even more if they were not constantly under various threats as a function of their demographic.

I don't really have a solution to this; it's just a problem I've been noticing. Blind jurors, targeted applications, and shared awards all seem to help in their own ways, but they don't get at the underlying problem of the positive feedback loop of resource acquisition for an already-scarce resource. These approaches also often try to be unbiased by removing demography from consideration, but doing so removes the context surrounding a person's accomplishments.

At the other extreme, it doesn't make sense to abolish this type of judgement altogether, because we need methods of evaluating a person's suitability for a position. Perhaps one solution is to place less (but not no) value on these accolades, and allow some amount of randomness into the picture. [There is already evidence that peer review of funding applications is nearly random due to random selection of review panels.](https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243918822744)

I am a proponent of considering someone holistically, and questioning my judgements for specificity rather than gut reactions. I don't aim to be unbiased; I am to interrogate where my biases lie and re-evaluate my judgements in the face of that interrogation. Hopefully that is enough.