---
title: 'Describing my PhD using xkcd simplewriter'
date: 2022-07-30
permalink: /posts/2022/07/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - Dissertation
  - SciComm
---

Using only the 1,000 most common English words to explain my PhD thesis:

[https://xkcd.com/simplewriter/](https://xkcd.com/simplewriter/)

Bad things in the air from burning are causing the earth to get warm faster than it should. 
I study machines that can stop those bad things from getting into the air where they are made and other machines that can get the bad things out of the air around us. 
Most of those machines are like the thing you use to clean a plate or a cup: when you get it wet, the water goes into the cleaning-thing, but after it gets really wet, you need to use power to get the water out and use the cleaning-thing again. 
For many bad-air-cleaners, that power comes from heat, so the machines need lots of money to work and may make other bad things in the air that can hurt people.
I try to make new bad-air-cleaners that need less money and hurt people less by using the same kind of power as your phone or watch. 
Bad-air-cleaners that use this kind of power can need less money, but not every bad-air-cleaner can use this kind of power.
Lots of people have ideas of bad-air-cleaners that do this, but there are too many ideas to try in person. 
I use computers to find out which bad-air-cleaner ideas might work with this kind of power and which ideas could be better than the heated bad-air-cleaners. 
I check my computer work by trying some ideas in person and seeing if the numbers from my computer are close to the numbers in person.
My computer work showed a new idea that other people could not get to work before, and I was able to show the idea worked in person.
On the way, I am using computers to find out which ideas we should check so it does not take too long to go from an idea to a machine that works.
I do this by picking numbers that can mean how much we know and how much we want to know - the best ideas to check are the ones that we know little but want to know a lot.
This work can be used for other problems, not just bad-air-cleaners, meaning it can help other people take their ideas and make them real faster.

