---
title: 'So you want to apply for grad school'
date: 2022-10-25
permalink: /posts/2023/10/grad-recruitment/
tags:
  - Research
---

Something I've heard when talking with undergrad students is a general lack of understanding of what a graduate degree looks like and, in turn, what things you need to do/have in order to get accepted. They often have this inflated view of what a good applicant looks like and end up convincing themselves out of trying despite having the potential to succeed. 

A lot of this disconnect is just because we, as faculty, don't communicate what grad school is and what it takes to get in because we forget what it was like to not know what we currently know. This is particularly true because faculty overwhelmingly come from highly educated families [(Morgan 2022)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-022-01425-4), which often means they knew these "inside secrets" from a young age. This gets exacerbated by anecdotes where only the top students with multiple papers/patents/etc. are getting into grad programs, making it seem like the requirements for entry are higher.

So, this post is broken into two parts: [(1)](#to-apply-or-not) what is grad school to help decide whether you want to pursue a grad degree and [(2)](#strengthening-your-application), if you decide to apply, what things you can do to improve your application. Important caveat that this is entirely specific to research-based STEM programs (MS by thesis, PhD) and not others (MD, MBA, etc).

### To apply or not

First, some common misconceptions:

* Cost - Lots of people worry about how much additional debt they'll go into as a graduate student and/or want to get a job for a few years and have their employer pay for the degree as part of their benefits (more common in engineering, I think). If you are a doing a research-based degree (MS thesis or PhD) in a STEM field the USA, your degree should be paid for by your research advisor -- that is the primary reason faculty grants are so big. This means you are not paying tuition (maybe some fees) AND you are getting paid a stipend (though often not a lot -- see [self-reported data](https://www.phdstipends.com/results) -- and potentially doing some teaching). If you apply to do a research degree and you are *not* going to get paid, I generally say not to take the offer. Not only is it exploitative, but it is also an indication that your advisor isn't bringing in enough grant money to pay you, which is (usually) a red flag.
	* Brief aside: One valid reason for not applying is application fees. Grad school applications are expensive for many people, but particularly those who have historically been excluded from higher education. Many places (grad schools, professional societies, funding agencies...) have assistance programs to waive some/all of the cost for you if you qualify (low income, military vets, certain underrepresented groups). Generally, if you can get your GRE cost reduced, you can get your application fee reduced. If you really want to apply someplace but can't afford it, it's worth reaching out to both the program you're applying to (not the grad school - the specific degree program! They're usually able to help more.) and to your home department/college/university to see if they can help, even if it is just pointing you to the right places. Some professional orgs like [oSTEM](https://ostem.org/page/grad-app-funding) have scholarship programs specifically for application fees if you qualify.

* Classes - The other big worry I hear is people not wanting to be in school for that long, by which they mean they don't want to take classes for several more years after undergrad, which I completely get. However, if you are doing a degree by research, most of your credits will be research credits leading to your thesis. The exact number of classes varies by program, but a rough estimate is that a 2 year MS by thesis is actually only about 1 year of classes, and a PhD is about 1 year on top of that. Often you will front-loaded with foundational courses, then spread the rest out over the rest of your time for better management. 
	* For reference: I think I averaged ~2 classes a semester during the first 2 years of my PhD and ~1 class a year (not even per semester) during my final 2 years.
	* Other thing to note is that grad programs have a set of required and elective courses. Required courses are fairly intensive work-wise because they're usually foundational things everyone needs to know, but elective courses are (in my experience) much more relaxed than even undergrad. This is largely because as faculty, we recognize your primary role is research, so we try to design these electives to most benefit your research, often by giving you the time to do it or by designing assignments/projects that might be helpful, like forcing you do finally do that lit review or set of calculations.

* MS before PhD - STEM degrees in the USA don't *require* a master's (though it can help your application to some PhD programs, see below). (In some countries, they do prefer a masters or the equivalent of an honors degree.) 
	* If you are pretty sure you want a PhD, applying straight out of a BS is fine, and your application will (should) be evaluated based on what would be expected as someone with only a BS. Some programs have extra requirements for people not entering with a MS-level degree (an extra few classes for equivalence); I find this is more common in engineering than science.
	* If are unsure about whether you want to do a PhD, doing "just" a master's is a great way to get exposed to what it's like, and many institutions will let you transfer into the straight-to-PhD option if you realize this early enough. Caveat: You cannot use the research from your master's thesis in your PhD thesis for copyright and academic integrity reasons, so defending a master's does affect timing.

With all of that out of the way, what actually does a grad school degree look like? Unlike undergrad, very little depends on your classes. You have to maintain your grades, often above a GPA cutoff greater than that of an undergrad's "good standing" level, but the majority of your time is spent doing research. On top of this: Professors understand that your primary job is research, so a good bulk of grad classes are lower workload. 

So what does that research entail? It varies a lot based on your field of research, but in generally it involves:
* Literature review - Reading books and papers so you know what is already known in the field.
* Developing a question - Identify a thing you want to know that the literature does not have the answer for.
* Learning and developing methods - Figuring out a systematic way to answer your question.
* Collecting and analyzing data - Answering the question and learning new things.
* Disseminating the conclusions - Share the new things you discovered.

A masters is (generally) doing this process once with a lot of guidance, while a PhD is (generally) doing this process 3 times, with less guidance each time. Ideally, by the final time you do this in a PhD, you should feel capable of doing all of these steps on your own.

That said, this is very idealized, and in reality lots of things don't work, so you have to think about how to troubleshoot methods, re-frame questions, come up with new explanations, etc. The things you want to do don't have to work, per se, but you need to be able to explain why they don't do what you expected them to do.

So, given this description, if you still want to do a research degree, what do you need to show to get in?

### Strengthening your application
By far, the easiest way to show that you can be successful at doing research is by having done research (in any STEM field) before, especially if you have published. However, in some ways I don't like saying that, because saying "you need to show you can do research before applying to a research degree" is counter to the fact that *learning how to do research is one of the outcomes*. It is my job, as a graduate faculty member, to teach you how to do these things, so I shouldn't expect you to arrive with all of this knowledge from the start.

(The preference towards applicants like this is largely a pressure from the university/funding agencies, who care more about "research output" than "learning outcomes," and unfortunately my job evaluations/tenure & promotion/etc are dependent on the university and funding agencies. The fact that these pressures are worse at top institutions is, in my view, a big reason why top institutions are so selective.)

So, if I, being as anti-normative as I am, do not prescribe to this perspective of "applicants with co-authored papers are better", what am I actually looking for in a candidate? (Necessary caveat: this is my perspective at this point in time; it may change as I mentor more students.) While papers are a great indication of many of these skills, I try to discuss how these traits can be shown through other means.

*Top priorities*: If you show something that violates these traits, you are immediately out of consideration.

* Ethical work -- We talk a lot about academic integrity, and that is part of it, but I'm also looking at whether you care about the quality of your work. This means your work is clearly your own, you cite ideas that are not yours, you make an effort to check back over your work for mistakes (spelling, grammar, factual errors), etc. 
* Safe lab practice -- Basically, I'm asking the question, "Will this person be a danger to themselves or others if I leave them alone in the lab?" It is much harder to assess this from a general application (unless a recommendation says something about this...), but if there's something that comes off as recklessness or carelessness, I am not willing to put other students' health and safety at risk.

*Important qualities*: These are things that will make a research degree easier, and any you don't show as a strength must be areas you are willing to grow in.

* Sustained commitment -- This does not have to be science; it can be a club or spot, a job you worked to pay the bills, or being a TA for the same class/professor multiple times. Doing research requires you to stick with a topic for a long time, so it can be a red flag if you are, for instance, hopping from club to club over the course of a few years. This looks even better when paired with the next point:
* Demonstrated leadership -- Again, not necessarily science, but also not necessarily formal leadership structures (elected positions in groups, promotions in a job). Leadership is basically other people trusting you enough to make key decisions. This is the role you will take on your thesis project, so showing you have experience doing so in other areas helps.
* Strong writing skills -- Most of science is actually not being in the lab or doing data analysis. Most of science is writing -- explaining your problems and findings to your boss, giving talks at conferences, writing papers for publication, proposing your work to potential funding sources, etc. I pay attention to this largely because STEM students, by virtue of completing their degree, demonstrated strong quantitative and analytical skills, but writing is often under-emphasized. Having a strong foundation or intuition for how to organize and convey a complex idea means we can better communicate, and therefore I can better help you when you encounter problems.
* Creative thinking and risk-taking -- Whether creative outlets or unconventional ideas that you propose(d), some example of doing something creative is important. I think of research as "creating" knowledge more than "uncovering" knowledge because often you are creating new methods or questions and following where they lead. This means you can't just repeat what someone else did; if you could, we would already know the answer. I particularly emphasize this for my group, which is more problem-oriented than method-oriented, meaning we learn, find, and adapt methods from other disciplines based on the research question rather than searching for new problems with address with existing methods.
* Comfort with failure and uncertainty -- Whether the failure is a bad grade or a failed experiment or a social conflict, I need to know that if you run into an experiment that isn't working (which is frequent in research), you can assess the problem, learn from it, seek out resources, and (sometimes) move on leaving it unresolved. I would say I spent more time troubleshooting things than doing "successful" experiments; the first ~15 months of lab work I did for my PhD never got (and won't ever get) published.

*Nice to have*: These are primarily things that I like and help a lot with my kind of work.
* Breadth of interests -- My work sits at the intersection of a lot of different areas, and I see lots of benefits from being able to draw from different areas of knowledge at various stages of the research process. Students who are willing to learn things in lots of different areas -- and who demonstrate comfort at thinking about similar problems through different ways of knowing -- will find my kind of research much easier. I particularly like students who have experience in areas that I'm unfamiliar with, as this helps them take a lead on projects and feel like they are a valuable part of the team rather than "just a student" working "under" me because they bring new knowledge, perspective, and audience considerations into the conversation.
* Big-picture thinking -- I use this term instead of just "systems-level thinking" because I don't just look for systems-level thinking. I also consider ethical thinking, community service, etc. under this category. Contemporary science is increasingly focused on minutiae, so being able to keep the bigger picture in mind is important for your sanity and for communicating why your work is important. It helps keep in focus whether the failed experiment actually matters, or if it is just something you are intellectually curious about. But, in my opinion, it is also important for finding and prioritizing new questions to ask -- you could always find some detail or new compound or new method to try, but I think it is more interesting to start your questions from who the stakeholders are.

*Things that I try to look for* (but are hard to evaluate from typical application packages):
* Strong reading skills -- This is coupled with the strong writing. You learn to be a better writer by reading widely, but also you can be a better scientist by actively seeking out information and critiquing other people's work (meaning you can point out both what they did poorly and what they did well).
	* One way to highlight this is to have a section in your personal statement where you call out a professor you'd like to work with (great practice to do anyway), but be very specific about why you want to work with them. What ideas in their prior work or call for applications made you interested, and what ideas do you think they missed out on?

*Things I don't really consider that other people may*:
* GRE scores -- Lots of places don't require this anymore anyway, but standardized tests are often a good representation of how well you can take tests, which is not always reflective of how good you are at research. That said, very low scores can be an indication that you don't handle stressful situations well (which are frequent in STEM), so I do make a note if they are very low.
* GPA -- I may look at grades for a specific course that is related to my research program (e.g., as someone who does a lot of chemistry research, if you struggled in all of your chemistry courses, that's a red flag), but your average grade across all courses? Not particularly relevant. This is especially because different departments at different institutions re-balance grades differently (my undergrad program tended to average around a B-, which was much lower than other programs in the same school), so the work and knowledge to get a 3.0 at one place could have gotten you a 4.0 at another.
* Degree field -- My work is interdisciplinary, so if you are in some kind of related field and can justify how your knowledge relates to the work I want to do, great! My general rule is if you can convince me that your training, whether in or of classes, prepares you to do the research I do, it doesn't matter what is written on your degree. Some people, however, are very much sticklers about fields (I was rejected or accepted as masters without funding to multiple places because I was switching from one type of engineering to another). 

Basically, all of these things are things that you can highlight in your resume or personal statements, often through things that you are already doing, just not necessarily emphasizing because they aren't always in a STEM field. To me, technical knowledge is a thing you can learn on the job, and I'm willing to help students with that because my specific area of research is often not taught in courses. That means for me in particular, a lot of these "softer" skills or traits become more important.

(Again, repeating the caveat: this is my perspective at this point in time; it may change as I mentor more students.)

